Computer Fundamental and Application Course Syllabus and Examination Papers

Course Syllabus Details (CMP 116)

Course Code: CMP 116 (3 Credits)
University: Pokhara University, Faculty of Science and Technology
Course Title: Computer Fundamental and Application (3-3-2)
Nature of the Course: Theory + Practical
Level: Bachelor, Program: Bachelor of Computer Application
Year/Semester: I
Full Marks: 100
Pass Mark: 45
Total Lectures: 48 hours

1. Course Description

This course is designed to conceptualize the computer fundamental knowledge and its application to solve the real-life problems. This course covers the concept of computer, computer organization, software, hardware, functional behavior of peripherals and important accessories, data communication, computer networks and burning technologies. In this syllabus unit I and II covers the fundamental concept of computer; unit III and VII covers the software, unit IV and V covers the hardware while unit VI and VIII covers the data sharing tools and trends. The course includes theoretical and practical implementation of software tools and applications.

2. Course Objectives

The general course objectives of this course are outlined as:

To familiarize students with fundamental knowledge about computer system.

To make the students understand software, hardware and their working procedure.

To enhance students' knowledge about various components of computer.

To train students about assembling and disassembling, general maintenance and networking of computers.

3. Methods of Instruction

The medium of instruction is English. Faculty members can use various teaching methodologies such as Class Room/Lecture-based, Discussion-based, Project-based Learning (PBL), Problem-Based Learning, Flipped Classroom-based, Active Learning, Socratic Method, Cooperative Learning, Experimental Learning, Gamification, Inquiry-based Learning, Constructivist Approach, Collaborative Learning, Direct Instruction, Differentiated Instruction, Montessori Method, Reggio Emilia Approach, Waldorf Education, Peer Teaching etc. After completion of each unit, faculty members can evaluate the students theoretically and practically through VIVA, Supervised test, Questionnaire test, Assignment test, Project work and Practical work, Terminal examination.

4. Course Contents (Unit-wise)

Unit No.

Specific Unit wise Objective

Course Contents

Hours

Unit 1: Introduction to Computer

1) Explain the conceptual knowledge of computer with historical and generation background. 2) Describe the types of computer with characteristics and applications.

1.1 Definition, 1.2 History of computer, 1.3 Generation of computer, 1.4 Types of Computer, 1.5 Characteristics of computer, 1.6 Applications of computer

5 hours

Unit 2: Basic Organization of Computer

1) Explain the organization of computer with their functional components. 2) Describe the working mechanism of computer system.

2.1 Basic function of computer, 2.2 Basic functional organization of computer (2.2.1 Input unit, 2.2.2 Output unit, 2.2.3 Storage unit, 2.2.4 Arithmetic and logic unit, 2.2.5 Control unit, 2.2.6 Central Processing Unit (CPU)), 2.3 The system concept

4 hours

Unit 3: Computer Software

1) Describe the concept of computer software with their roles. 2) Explain the software architectures and their application.

3.1 Introduction to software, 3.2 Logical system architecture, 3.3 Types of software (3.3.1 System Software, 3.3.2 Application Software, 3.3.3 Utility Software), 3.4 Firmware, 3.6 Middleware

6 hours

Unit 4: Computer Accessories

1) Familiarized with input and output accessories with their application. 2) Identify the role of agronomical design in related devices.

4.1 The Input Accessories (Keyboard Devices, Point and Draw Devices, Yoke, Data Scanning Devices, Digitizer, Microphone, Electronic Cards Based Devices, Speech Recognition Devices, Vision Based Devices), 4.2 The Output Accessories (Monitor, Printer, Plotter, GPS, Projectors, Headphones, Soundcard/video Card, Speaker, Voice Response System, Computer Output Microfilm (COM), SGD Speech Generation Device), 4.3 Ergonomically Designed Devices

9 hours

Unit 5: Storage Devices

1) Describe the characters of primary and secondary storage devices. 2) Explain the function and behavior of different types of memories.

5.1 Introduction, 5.2 Types of Storage Devices, 5.3 Cache memory, 5.4 Registers, 5.5 Primary Memory (Introduction, Characteristics, Types, Difference between RAM and ROM, DRAM and SRAM, primary and secondary memory), 5.6 Secondary Memory (Introduction, Characteristics, Types, Difference between Hard disk and SSD, magnetic and optical disk, direct and sequential access magnetic memory)

7 hours

Unit 6: Data Communication and Computer Network

1) Interpret the method of data communication including transmission modes and media. 2) Explain the relationship of computer network and topologies with their advantages and disadvantages. 3) Compare the role of email and internet in modern life.

6.1 Data Communication (Introduction, Basic Elements, Data Transmission Modes (Simplex, Half Duplex, Full Duplex), Data transmission Speed (Narrowband, Voice band, Broadband), Data Transmission Media (Twisted-pair wire, coaxial cable, Optical fibers, Microwave system, Communication satellite)), 6.2 Computer Network (Definition, Types (PAN, LAN, CAN, MAN and WAN), Differences, advantages, disadvantages, Network Topologies, Intranet, Extranet, Internet), 6.2.5 E-mail

5 hours

Unit 7: Operating System

1) Explain the features of operating system and its historical background. 2) Describe the functional and architecture behaviors of various type of OS. 3) Explain the different installation methods for operating system.

7.1 Introduction, 7.2 History and evolution of OS, 7.3 Objective of OS, 7.4 Generation of OS, 7.5 Functions of OS, 7.6 Types of OS, 7.7 System architecture of OS, 7.8 Different between GUI and TUI/CUI, 7.9 The booting system, 7.10 Windows/ Linux operating system, settings, properties and installation guides

6 hours

Unit 8: AI and Emerging Technologies

1. Familiarize with Artificial Intelligence and its applications. 2. Explain about emerging trends of technologies.

8.1 Introduction to AI, 8.2 AI and its Applications (8.2.1 Natural Language Processing, 8.2.2 Machine vision, 8.2.3 Expert system), 8.3 Machine Learning, 8.4 Neural Networks, 8.5 Blockchain technology, 8.6 IoT, 8.7 Cloud Computing, 8.8 Cyber Security

6 hours

Laboratory Work

A. Office Automation

a) Word-processing: Basic options for typing, editing, formatting, margin setting, viewing, designing, printing a document. Creating, insetting, editing, formulating table. Document preparation with table, figure, page number, margin setting etc. and printing document as a report submission.

b) Spreadsheet: Preparing sheet for data processing (arithmetic, logical, functional operation). Preparing data table for calculation, analysis and creating various charts for presentation. Inserting picture, table, graphs into word-processing. Printing documents after proper setting.

c) Presentation: Creating various types of slides with master slide for presentation. Setting the slide into the required format.

B. Email and Internet

Setting various kinds of email account and using them for personal and group purpose.

Uploading and downloading the information form internet.

6. Evaluation System and Students' Responsibilities

Internal Evaluation

Weight

Marks

External Evaluation

Marks

Theory



30

Semester End

50

Attendance & Class Participation

10%







Assignments

20%







Presentations/Quizzes

10%







Internal Assessment

60%







Practical



20





Attendance & Class Participation

10%







Lab Report/Project Report

20%







Practical Exam/Project Work

40%







Viva

30%







Total Internal



50





Full Marks: $50+50=100$









Students' Responsibilities: Each student must secure at least 45% marks separately in internal assessment and practical evaluation with 80% attendance in the class in order to appear in the Semester End Examination.

7. Prescribed Books and References

Text Books:

P.K. and Priti Sinha, Foundations of Computing, BPB Publications, Third Edition

References Books:

A Text Book of Computer Fundamental and Application, OCEM Publication, (Second Edition), by Hari Bhandari

Computer Fundamentals, BPB Publications by V.K Jain

Past Examination Questions

Pokhara University: Fall 2024 (New Course)

Level: Bachelor, Programme: BCA
Course: Computer Fundamentals and Application (New)
Full Marks: 100, Pass Marks: 45, Time: 3 hrs.

a) Define Computer? Explain different generations of computer in details. (8)
b) What is a Processing Unit? Mention the components of Processing Unit. OR Explain the digital computer system with diagram. Write about each sub system in details. (7)

a) Explain the types of Computer Software? Explain with the real-life examples. (8)
b) Differentiate between softcopy and hard copy output devices. Explain different types of monitors used in today's market. (7)

a) What is an Input Device? Explain different types of Data Scanning Devices. (8)
b) Explain Memory Hierarchy. Write about the different types of memory used in computer system. (7)

a) Define Permanent Storage. Differentiate between HDD and SSD in details with use cases. (8)
b) What is network topology? Explain basic network topologies with diagram. (7)

a) Explain the roles of OS in the computer system. (7)
b) Explain different types of Operating System? Differentiate between Graphical User Interface (GUI) and Text User Interface (TUI). (8)

a) What do you mean by Artificial Intelligence (AI)? Explain its application in the real world. (8)
b) Explain different types of machine learning in details with example. (7)

Write short notes on: (Any two) (2x5)

Firmware and Middleware

Electronic card-based devices

Intranet & Extranet

Pokhara University: Fall 2024 (Old Course)

Level: Bachelor, Programme: BCA
Course: Computer Fundamental and Application (Old)
Full Marks: 100, Pass Marks: 45, Time: 3 hrs.

a) Define computer. Explain different types of computer on the basis of size and speed. (7)
b) Briefly explain the functional units of a computer system along with its block diagram. (8)

a) What is computer software? Explain types of application software. (7)
b) Troubleshoot vision based and speech recognition devices along with diagram. (7)

a) What is an operating system? Explain warm booting and cold booting. (8)
b) Explain the functions of the following commands with syntax: (7)
i. CHKDSK
ii. TREE
iii. ATTRIB
iv. REN

a) What is motherboard? Explain briefly the major parts of a motherboard. (8)
b) Define secondary memory along with its types. (7)

a) Write the importance of backup in computer system along with its types. (7)
b) What is computer virus? How can you know that your system is affected by virus? Write symptoms. (8)

a) Define computer network. Explain different types of computer network. (7)
b) What is RAID? Differentiate between system and address bus. (8)

Write short notes on: (Any two) (2x5)

Search engine

Hybrid computer

Power supply unit

Pokhara University: Spring 2024

Level: Bachelor, Programme: BCA
Course: Computer Fundamental and Application
Full Marks: 100, Pass Marks: 45, Time: 3 hrs.

a) Define Computer. Explain the characteristics of computer in details. (8)
b) What are the functions of computer? Explain functional units of computer with diagram. (7)

a) Define software and program. Explain the different types of software with example. (7)
b) Define Network. Explain different types of network topologies in brief. (8)

a) What is softcopy output device? Differentiate between CRT and LCD Monitor. (7)
b) Explain the following commands with syntax and function: (8)
i. COPYCON
ii. LABEL
iii. TYPE
iv. PING
v. MKDIR
vi. CLS
vii. CHKDSK

a) Define SMPS. Write brief about the different components used in motherboard. (8)
b) What are the different types of bus system? Explain. (7)

a) What is the role of Storage Device in computer System? Differentiate between RAM and ROM. (7)
b) Explain different ergonomically designed devices in brief. (8)

a) Define system maintenance. Explain different types of maintenance used to maintain the system. (7)
b) Define GUI and TUI/CUI. Differentiate between warm booting and cold booting. (8)

Write short notes on: (Any two) (2x5)

Power caring factors

Processor and types

Internet and E-mail

Pokhara University: Fall 2023 (New Course)

Level: Bachelor, Programme: BCA
Course: Computer Fundamentals and Application (New)
Full Marks: 100, Pass Marks: 45, Time: 3 hrs.

a) Define Computer. Write down the application areas of computer in details. (8)
b) Draw the block diagram of Digital Computer. Explain each unit in detail. (7)

a) What is Software? Explain different types of software used in computer system. (8)
b) Explain how SSD is more efficient compared to other secondary storage media like hard disk. (7)

a) What do you mean by peripheral devices? Explain any five output devices. (10)
b) How do ergonomically designed devices increase efficiency of computer users? Explain in brief. (5)

a) Define the use of Cache Memory. Explain about the any three types of primary memory with their uses in computer system. (8)
b) What is computer network. Explain different network topologies with their advantages and disadvantages. OR Define Data Communication. Explain different transmission media in details. (7)

a) Define Operating System. Explain the different functions of Operating system in details. (8)
b) Draw the Operating System architecture. Explain the different types of operating systems available in market today. (7)

a) What do you mean by Artificial Intelligence? Explain its any three applications. (8)
b) What is Block chain technology? Explain in brief. OR What is cybersecurity? Explain in brief. (7)

Write short notes on: (Any two) (2x5)

Firmware

IoT

Data Transmission Modes

Pokhara University: Fall 2022

Level: Bachelor, Programme: BCA
Course: Computer Fundamental and Application
Full Marks: 100, Pass Marks: 45, Time: 3 hrs.

a) What is computer? Explain the different generations of computer with major electronic components and other related technologies. (7)
b) Draw a functional diagram of digital computer also explain the functions of each unit in details. (8)

a) Define hardware and software. Explain different types of software used in computer in details with examples. (7)
b) What is softcopy output? Differentiate between impact and non-impact printer. (8)

a) Define network topology. Explain different types of network topologies with its advantages and disadvantages. (8)
b) Define operating system. Explain different functions of operating System in details. (7)

a) Explain the following commands with syntax and function: (8)
i. COP CON
ii. CD
iii. TYPE
iv. PING
v. MKDIR
vi. CLS
vii. CHKDSK
b) What do you mean by power supply? Explain different types of power supply in detail. (7)

a) Why is motherboard used to refer to the main board of a computer? Describe major components of motherboard. (8)
b) What is system BIOS in computer? Compare and contrast between primary and secondary memory. (7)

a) What do you mean by system maintenance? Explain different types of maintenance are used in system maintenance. (7)
b) Define Backup? Explain different backup techniques used in computer system for backup purpose. (8)

Write short notes on any two: (2x5)

CUI vs GUI

Differentiate between RAM and ROM

System care Factor

Pokhara University: Spring 2021

Level: Bachelor, Programme: BCA
Course: Computer Fundamental and Application
Full Marks: 100, Pass Marks: 45, Time: 3 hrs.

a) What do you mean by generation of computer? Explain the various generation of computer with the advantages and disadvantages of each. (8)
b) Explain the functional units of computer with diagram. What are the functions of computer? (7)

a) What do you mean by Application software? Explain about generic and customized software with example. (7)
b) What is plotter? What are the application areas of Speech Recognition devices? Explain in detail. (8)

a) What do you mean by network topologies? Explain any three types of network topologies. (7)
b) Explain the function of Any Four of the following command with syntax and example: (8)
i. PATH
ii. SCANDISK
iii. TREE
iv. LABEL
v. MOVE

a) What is RAID? Explain the difference between SCSI and RAID. (8)
b) What do you mean by power supply? Explain about different types of power supply. (7)

a) What is backup? Explain different types of backup used in computer. Explain the PC maintenance and its types. (7)
b) What do you mean by secondary storage? Explain the functional mechanism of Compact Disk. (8)

a) Why motherboard is called mainboard of PC? Explain major parts of a motherboard. (8)
b) What do you mean by maintenance? Explain about different types of maintenance. (7)

Write short notes on any two: (2x5)

GUI vs TUI/CUI

System Care Factors

Booting in Computer

Pokhara University: Fall 2021

Level: Bachelor, Programme: BCA
Course: Computer Fundamental and Application
Full Marks: 100, Pass Marks: 45, Time: 3 hrs.

a) Define Computer. Explain the different generations of computer with major electronic components and other related technologies. (8)
b) What are the functions performed by computer? Draw a functional diagram and explain the functions of each unit in details. (7)

a) What is Processor? Explain all the types of processor that are present today. (8)
b) Differentiate between Impact and Non-Impact Printer. (7)

a) Define Client Server Model. Explain various LAN topologies with characteristics advantages and disadvantages. (7)
b) How Operating System is different from other software. Explain major functions of OS. (8)

a) What is SMPS? Explain various types of UPS in Detail. (7)
b) Explain following commands with syntax and function: (8)
i. COPY CON
ii. TYPE
iii. SCANDISK
iv. PING

a) What are different types of virus (nature program)? Explain various types of virus with examples. (5)
b) What are the different types of Bus system? Explain. (5)
c) How the development of Core Processor increases the processing capacity of computer. (5)

a) What is the storage mechanism of Hard Disket? Explain with block diagram. (8)
b) What are the types of backup? Explain about cloud backup. (7)

Write short notes on any two: (2x5)

Power caring factors

ATX Power Supply

LCD

Pokhara University: Fall 2020

Level: Bachelor, Programme: BCA
Course: Computer Fundamentals and Application
Full Marks: 100, Pass Marks: 45, Time: 3 hrs.

a) Briefly explain history of computer. What is the role of IT in a competitive market? (7)
b) Draw a Block Diagram to illustrate the basic organization of a computer system and explain the functions of the various units? (8)

a) What is system software? Explain different types of software. (7)
b) Differentiate between input and output devices. Explain role of LED in IT industry. (8)

a) What is computer network? Explain different types of network topology. (7)
b) What is the use of warm and cold booting in the computer system? Differentiate between GUI and TUI/CUI. (8)

a) Differentiate between SCSI and RAID? What are the different types of bus system? Explain. (8)
b) What is a power supply in computer and what is it about? Explain the concepts of SMPS and UPS. (7)

a) What is storage device? Explain different types of storage devices. (8)
b) What is the importance of real time operating system? Give any appropriate example. (7)

a) What is system care? Is it really needed in business organization? (8)
b) What is Data recovery? Write about data backup methods. (7)

Write short notes on any two: (2x5)

Internet and E-mail

Ergonomically Designed Devices

Digitizer